feat: Add ability to download specific tool versions used by hooks. TLDR: add `--hook-config=--tool-version=1.2.3` for pinning wrapped tool version. Works for all tools (even `terraform` and `tofu`) except `checkov` (#1002)
antonbabenko/pre-commit-terraform: README.md

  * [All hooks: Set env vars inside hook at runtime](#all-hooks-set-env-vars-inside-hook-at-runtime)
  * [All hooks: Disable color output](#all-hooks-disable-color-output)
  * [All hooks: Log levels](#all-hooks-log-levels)
  * [Most hooks: Pin a specific tool version](#most-hooks-pin-a-specific-tool-version)

>     * [Keeping pinned versions up to date with Renovate](#keeping-pinned-versions-up-to-date-with-renovate)

Author: ```suggestion
    * [Keeping pinned versions up-to-date using Renovate](#keeping-pinned-versions-up-to-date-using-renovate)
```

Less verbose log levels will be implemented in [#562](https://github.com/antonbabenko/pre-commit-terraform/issues/562).

### Most hooks: Pin a specific tool version

> > All hooks, which wrapping a tool distributed as a downloadable release binary. Not supported for `checkov`/`terraform_checkov` (pip-distributed) and for deprecated `terraform_docs_replace`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> All hooks, which wrap a tool distributed as a downloadable release asset. Not supported for `checkov`/`terraform_checkov` (distributed via PyPi) and for deprecated `terraform_docs_replace` hook.
```

> 1. You can pin a specific version of the wrapped tool per-hook, independent of whatever is on `$PATH` or baked into the Docker image. If that version isn't already cached locally, it's downloaded from the tool's GitHub releases on first use, then reused (no re-download) on every subsequent run.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. You can pin a specific version of the wrapped tool per hook, independent of whatever is on your `$PATH` or baked into the Docker image. If that version isn't already cached locally, it's downloaded from the tool's GitHub releases on first use, then reused (without re-downloading) on every subsequent run.
```

> 1. You can pin a specific version of the wrapped tool per hook, independent of whatever is on your `$PATH` or baked into the Docker image. If that version isn't already cached locally, it's downloaded from the tool's GitHub releases on first use, then reused (without re-downloading) on every subsequent run.

Author: I don't see an issue here. "Github release" is more undersandable, IMO.
 @yermulnik ?

> 1. You can pin a specific version of the wrapped tool per hook, independent of whatever is on your `$PATH` or baked into the Docker image. If that version isn't already cached locally, it's downloaded from the tool's GitHub releases on first use, then reused (without re-downloading) on every subsequent run.

Reviewer: "GitHub releases" describes the feature, but e.g. "GitHub releases page" (or with capitalized "Releases" to mark the section on the web-site) describes the actual location where we download assets from.
So I'd add "page" after "releases" to provide clarity. However, tech-savvies do indeed often say "Github releases" meaning "Github Releases page" =)
Up to you :thumbsup:

    Config example:

    ```yaml
    - id: terraform_tflint
    args:
        - --hook-config=--tool-version=0.50.0
    ```

> 2. The same `--tool-version` key also works on `terraform_validate`, `terraform_fmt` and `terraform_providers_lock`, which resolve their Terraform/OpenTofu binary through [`--tf-path`](#11-custom-terraform-binaries-and-opentofu-support) - by default it downloads/uses whichever of `terraform`/`opentofu` the rest of that precedence chain would otherwise have picked (`terraform`, unless it's absent from `$PATH` while `tofu` is present, in which case `opentofu`). To pick explicitly instead of relying on that auto-detection, set `--tf-path` to the literal value `terraform`, `opentofu`, or `tofu`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. The same `--tool-version` key also works for `terraform_validate`, `terraform_fmt` and `terraform_providers_lock`, which resolve their Terraform/OpenTofu binary through [`--tf-path`](#11-custom-terraform-binaries-and-opentofu-support) - by default it downloads/uses whichever of `terraform`/`opentofu` binary the rest of that precedence chain would otherwise have picked (`terraform`, unless it's missing from `$PATH` while `tofu` is present, in which case `opentofu`). To pick explicitly instead of relying on the auto-detection mechanism, set `--tf-path` to the literal value of `terraform`, `opentofu` or `tofu`:
```

    ```yaml
    - id: terraform_validate
    args:
        - --hook-config=--tf-path=opentofu
        - --hook-config=--tool-version=1.12.0
    ```

> [!TIP]
> 3. Since this resolves to a version-specific cached binary rather than mutating `$PATH`, the same hook can be listed multiple times with different pinned versions, e.g. to test compatibility across tool versions in one run:
>
> ```yaml
> - id: terraform_tflint
>   args:
>     - --hook-config=--tool-version=0.50.0
> - id: terraform_tflint
>   args:
>     - --hook-config=--tool-version=0.55.0
> ```

> 4. By default, if a different version of the tool is already on `$PATH`, the pinned version still wins (with a warning) - this is `--hook-config=--tool-version-mode=strict`. Set it to `prefer-local` to invert that: if the tool already resolves via `$PATH`, that local binary is used as-is and no download is attempted; the pinned version is only downloaded/used as a fallback when nothing is found locally.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. By default, if a different version of the tool is already on `$PATH`, the pinned version still wins (with a warning message logged) based on `--hook-config=--tool-version-mode=strict`. Set it to `prefer-local` (as opposite to `strict`) to invert that: if the tool already resolves via `$PATH`, this local binary is used as-is and no download is attempted; the pinned version is only downloaded/used as a fallback when nothing is found locally.
```

    ```yaml
    - id: terraform_tflint
    args:
        - --hook-config=--tool-version=0.50.0
        - --hook-config=--tool-version-mode=prefer-local
    ```

> 5. By default, downloaded binaries are cached under `$XDG_CACHE_HOME/pre-commit-terraform` (or `$HOME/.cache/pre-commit-terraform` if `XDG_CACHE_HOME` is unset). Override the location with the `PCT_TOOL_CACHE_DIR` environment variable - see [Mount tools cache directory](#mount-tools-cache-directory) for the Docker case.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
5. By default, downloaded binaries are cached under `$XDG_CACHE_HOME/pre-commit-terraform/` (or `$HOME/.cache/pre-commit-terraform/` if `XDG_CACHE_HOME` is unset). Override this location with the `PCT_TOOL_CACHE_DIR` environment variable - see [Mount tools cache directory](#mount-tools-cache-directory) for the Docker case.
```

> 6. If a `GITHUB_TOKEN` environment variable is set, it's used automatically to authenticate GitHub API requests made during version resolution, the same way it already is for [building your own Docker image](#docker-usage).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
6. If a `GITHUB_TOKEN` environment variable is set, it's inherited automatically to authenticate GitHub API requests made during version resolution, the same way it already is utilized for [building your own Docker image](#docker-usage).
```

> #### Keeping pinned versions up to date with Renovate

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Keeping pinned versions up-to-date using Renovate
```

> Neither Renovate's built-in [`pre-commit` manager](https://docs.renovatebot.com/modules/manager/pre-commit/) (which only understands `repo:`/`rev:` and `additional_dependencies` for Go/Node/Python) nor its `dockerfileVersions` preset can see inside a hook's `args:`, so a `--tool-version` pin needs its own [`customManagers`](https://docs.renovatebot.com/modules/manager/regex/) entry in your own `renovate.json5`, using the same `# renovate: datasource=... depName=...` annotation convention commonly used for Dockerfile `ARG *_VERSION` pins:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Neither Renovate's built-in [`pre-commit` manager](https://docs.renovatebot.com/modules/manager/pre-commit/) (which only understands `repo:`/`rev:` and `additional_dependencies` for Go/Node/Python) nor its `dockerfileVersions` preset can "look" inside hook's `args:`, so the `--tool-version` pin needs its own [`customManagers`](https://docs.renovatebot.com/modules/manager/regex/) entry in your own `renovate.json5` config file, using the same `# renovate: datasource=... depName=...` annotation convention commonly used for Dockerfile `ARG *_VERSION` pins:
```

    | set to `terraform`, `opentofu`, or `tofu`  | set              | Download/use the pinned version of whichever of the two was selected                                                                         |
    | set to anything else (e.g. an actual path) | set              | Error - combined with `--tool-version`, `--tf-path` only accepts `terraform`, `opentofu`, or `tofu`                                          |
    | unset                                      | unset            | Falls back to the normal [`--tf-path`](#11-custom-terraform-binaries-and-opentofu-support) precedence chain (env vars, then `$PATH`)         |

> [!TIP]
> 3. Since this resolves to a version-specific cached binary rather than mutating `$PATH`, the same hook can be listed multiple times with different pinned versions, e.g. to test compatibility across tool versions in one run:
>
> ```yaml
> - id: terraform_tflint
>   args:
>     - --hook-config=--tool-version=0.50.0
> - id: terraform_tflint
>   args:
>     - --hook-config=--tool-version=0.55.0
> ```

> 1. By default, if a different version of the tool is already on `$PATH`, the pinned version still wins (with a warning message logged) based on `--hook-config=--tool-version-mode=strict`. Set it to `prefer-local` (as opposite to `strict`) to invert that: if the tool already resolves via `$PATH`, this local binary is used as-is and no download is attempted; the pinned version is only downloaded/used as a fallback when nothing is found locally.

Reviewer: Is the numbering correct here and below 1,2,3 vs 4,5,6 as I might expect? 🤔
